In Py City Schools, only 65% of students are passing both Reading and Math.  When we analyze by school, we can see that the top 5 schools all had passing rates above 90% and were all charter schools, while the bottom 5 schools were all below 54% passing and were all public schools in the Py City School District.  In fact, charter schools on average had over 90% passing rate, while district schools on average had only a 53.67% rate.  This might lead us to believe that charter schools are vastly superior to district schools.

It is worth noting, though, that school size also breaks down in a similar way.  Among schools with fewer than 1000 students, the passing rate was 89.88%, and schools with between 1000-2000 students had a passing rate of 90.62%.  Large schools, by contrast, had a passing rate of only 58.29%.  The largest charter school has 2283 students, while the smallest district school has 2739.  

There is a criticism of charter schools, for which there is ample research (see, for instance, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-charters-admissions/special-report-class-struggle-how-charter-schools-get-students-they-want-idUSBRE91E0HF20130216/) that charter schools cherry-pick their students.  By keeping school sizes artificially low, they can introduce admissions requirements that allow them to accept only the students they want to accept.  Public schools do not have such requirements.  As such, we may be seeing that students coming into charter schools are already better equipped to pass math and reading standardized tests than their public schools counterparts, rather than an indication of how well the relative schools are performing.

This may be born out in the budget data of the present analysis as well.  In an inverse of what we would expect to see, the less a school spends on students, the higher the rate of students passing math and reading tests, with schools spending less than $585 per student averaging 90.37%, while schools spending more than $645 per student average just 53.53%.  It would be tempting to argue that charter schools receive less funding and manage to do more with it, but this would be a dangerous assumption to make.  First, because they can cherry-pick their students, charter schools often end up picking students who are from higher-income families (although not specifically, as in requiring income values for their families, but rather by nature of the fact that lower-income students tend to be less-prepared for school to begin with and tend to have more barriers to performance, such as parents working late when students might need help with their homework, which would both get screened out as part of the admissions process).  This means that they will need to spend less in supplies for needy students and less in food for free-and-reduced-lunch programs.  Second, because charter schools tend to be much newer, and their supplies are much newer, they have to spend a smaller portion of their budget to maintain the buildings and replenish books.

This implies a need for further data analysis.  One thing that would be helpful to confirm or invalidate the hypotheses above would be to include household income into the student data.  For each school, we could develop a quartile or percentile division to see how students from different income brackets perform, and how many of each attend charter schools or district schools.  If, as hypothesized, a significantly higher number of low-income students attend district schools, this would confirm the hypothesis that charter schools are performing well in large part due to their self-selection of students.  It would also suggest that budgets for public schools need to be vastly increased to help provide after-school food, tutoring, and recreational activities to give students supportive environments to learn and grow.

